# MicrobiomeModule
Learning module for teaching microbiome analysis in an introductory programming course. 

Developed by the University of Pittsburgh Biomedical Informatics Training Program with the support of the National Library of Medicine data science supplement to the University of Pittsburgh (Grant # T15LM007059-30S1).

Distributed under an [GPL v3.0 License](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0.en.html).

Description

# 1. Learning Outcomes

Students are expected to learn basic facts about the microbiome and perform microbiome analyses from pre-processed data to results.

- Basics about the human and environmental microbiome
- An understanding of microbiome experiments
- Familiarity with features of microbiome analyses
- Applying measures of within- and between-sample diversity


# 2. Licensing/Restrictions/Access

[GPL v3.0 License](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0.en.html).

# 3. Target Student Audience 

Graduate students learning applied programming.

# 4. Prerequisite Skills and Knowledge Required

Familiarity with R programming

# 5. Domain Problem

Analyses of microbiome data, including abundance and OTUs.

# 6. Dataset for the case study

Microbiome samples collected from soil in Pittsburgh, PA,  processed by Zymo Research and analzyed using a standard microbiome pipeline.

# 7. Skills to be taught

## 7.1 Knowledge representation

Data available as tables in CSV format
R code in HTML example files

## 7.2 Computation

Analysis of microbiome data with [Decipher](http://www2.decipher.codes) and other R tools.

## 7.3 Visual Analysis

Plots generated by R Code:
- Scatterplots
- Phylogenetic trees
- Heatmaps
- PCA biplots
- Hierarchical Clustering

## 7.4 Statistical analyses

- Alpha- and Beta- Diversity measurements
- Principal components analyses

## 7.5 Reproducibility 

- Description of microbiome pitfalls in pdf presentation
- Validation with positive and negative controls

# 8. Problem solving skills

- Determination of the extent to which the results support the hypothesis of the experiment
- Looking for contaminants in microbiome samples
- Verifying whether (positive and negative) control samples yield the expected results

# 9. Reflection 

- What makes microbiome analyses difficult?
- What is the difference between reference-free and reference-based analysis approaches?
- What is one way of comparing diversity across samples?
- What method(s) can we use to computationally test hypotheses in microbiome experiments?






